WIP: Introduce nix flake (Part-1) (#2)
juspay/todo-app: tutorial/nixify/1_nix_flake.md

<!-- This is the first part of the series that will help you improve the dev workflow of your haskell project in every part.  -->

> This is the first part of a series of blogs, with the end-goal of having a better dev workflow for your haskell project. We are aiming for a "works out-of-the-box" experience. [Nix](https://nixos.org) will be used during this process. [Read here](https://haskell.flake.page/nix-rapid) for a rapid introduction to Nix. Throughout this series we assume the reader to have an understanding of Nix and [Nix flakes](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes).\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the first part of a series of blog posts, with the end-goal of having a better dev workflow for your haskell project. We are aiming for a "works out-of-the-box" experience. [Nix](https://nixos.org) will be used during this process. [Read here](https://haskell.flake.page/nix-rapid) for a rapid introduction to Nix. Throughout this series we assume the reader to have an understanding of Nix and [Nix flakes](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes).\
```

> The series is designed in a way that each blog will work on the previous blog to improve the development experience. First blog will introduce you to the pain points of using a haskell project without Nix, then we will bring in Nix flakes. The Haskell project of choice here is, [todo-app](https://github.com/juspay/todo-app/tree/tutorial/part-0). This app was chosen for two main reasons: 1) Keep things simple 2) Demonstrate how to manage dependencies like postgres and postgREST without having to set them up manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The series is designed in a way that each blog post will work on the previous blog post to improve the development experience. First blog post will introduce you to the pain points of using a haskell project without Nix, then we will bring in Nix flakes. The Haskell project of choice here is, [todo-app](https://github.com/juspay/todo-app/tree/tutorial/part-0). This app was chosen for two main reasons: 1) Keep things simple 2) Demonstrate how to manage runtime dependencies like postgres and postgREST without having to set them up manually.
```

- Install Postgres and start the server
- Run the script `db.sh` to load the DB dump
- Install PostgREST and start the web server
- Install `cabal-install`, `ghc`
- Build the project using `cabal`
The steps mentioned above are brief, refer to the [README](https://github.com/juspay/todo-app/blob/tutorial/part-0/README.md) for details.\
These are some of the problems with the steps mentioned above:
- Postgres and PostgREST are installed globally: This will create problems when you want to work on multiple different versions of these dependencies.
- If the project doesn't specify the versions of the dependencies used, then you might end up in what's called a "Dependency hell".
- Developer time spent setting up all of those dependencies, when all they want is to quickly make changes and test them.
\
How is Nix going to solve the above issues?
- Postgres server will run using the data directory in the current project directory.
- Both Postgres and PostgREST are only present in the Nix shell and since they are installed in Read-only filesystem `/nix`, having multiple different versions will not cause any issues as there is no chance of any rewrites by mistake.

> - The `flake.lock` file will contain the locked content hash, revision and source of "inputs" which will ensure the same source is used on further builds.

Reviewer: We could improve these points a bit. Let me think about this.

\

> All these benefits are listed as per the Nixification that will be happening in this blog. More benefits will be depmonstrated in upcoming blogs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All these benefits are listed as per the Nixification that will be happening in this blog post. More benefits will be depmonstrated in upcoming blog posts.
```

## Introduce Flake

Let's start by creating a `flake.nix` file in the root directory. The first step after this will be to write the basic template for the flake, which consists of `inputs` and `outputs`. 
```nix
{
  inputs = {

  };
  outputs = {self, ...}: {

  };
}

```

```nix
{
  inputs.nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixpkgs-unstable";
  outputs = {self, nixpkgs}: {
    
  };
}

```

```nix
{
  inputs.nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixpkgs-unstable";

>   outputs = {self, ...}@inputs: {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  outputs = inputs@{self, ...}: {
```

## DevShell support

```nix
{
  # Inside outputs
  devShells = forAllSystems ( system: {
    default = ...
    shell1 = ...
    shell2 = ...
  });
}

```
```nix
{
  # Inside outputs
  devShells = forAllSystems ( system: {
    default = haskellPackages'.${system}.shellFor {
      packages = p : [
        p.todo-app
      ];
      buildInputs = with haskellPackages'.${system}; [
        cabal-install
        todo-app
      ];
    };
  });
}

```
Talk about why shellFor ^

## Flakify postgres and postgREST

```nix
{
  # Inside outputs
  apps = forAllSystems ( system: {
    app1 = ...
    app2 = ...
    default = ...
  });
}

```
```nix
{
  # Inside outputs
  apps = forAllSystems ( system: {
    hello = {
      type = "app";
      program = toString pkgs.${system}.hello;
    }
    default = self.apps.hello;
  });
}

```
Talk about `type` and the output of `nix run .#hello`
```nix
{
  # Inside outputs
  apps = forAllSystems ( system: {
    postgres =
      let
        pgsql = pkgs.${system}.postgresql;
      in
      {
        type = "app";
        program = toString ( 

>           pkgs.${system}.writeShellScript "pg" ''

Reviewer: I'd use `writeShellApplication` instead as it uses shellcheck automatically.

Author: I have changed it to `writeShellApplication`! shellcheck is great. I have also added more checks in the script in scenarios where the database is running and data directory already exists.

            db-schemas = \"api\"
            db-anon-role = \"todo_user\"" > data/db.conf
            
            # Load DB dump
            ${pgsql}/bin/psql -h $PWD/data < db.sql
          ''
          );
      };
  });
}
```
```nix
{
  # Inside outputs
  apps = forAllSystems ( system: {
    postgrest = {
      type = "app";
      program = toString (
        pkgs.${system}.writeShellScript "pgREST" ''
          # Run postgrest using the configuration
          ${nixpkgs.lib.getExe haskellPackages'.${system}.postgrest} -- ./data/db.conf
        ''
      );
    };
  });
}
```
```nix
{
  # Inside outputs
  apps = forAllSystems ( system: {
    postgres_stop = {
      type = "app";
      program = toString (
        pkgs.${system}.writeShellScript "pgStop" ''
          # Stop postgres server
          ${pkgs.${system}.postgresql}/bin/pg_ctl -D ./data/db stop
        ''
      );
    };
  });
}
```

## Before vs After

- Installing postgres, setting up server and loading db dump replaced with -> `nix run .#postgres`
- Installing postgREST webserver, running it replaced with -> `nix run .#postgrest`

> - Installing cabal-install, building the project replaced with -> `nix develop` and `nix build`

Reviewer: Also `nix run`
